#Title: “VoldePlot: A Lightweight Shiny Web Application for Visualizing Gene Expression through Volcano Plots”


Tags: 
-R
-Shiny
-Bioinformatics
-Data Visualization
-Volcano plots
-Gene Expression

Author: 
-Name: Shourya Prasad Sharma
-Orcid ID: 0009-0006-2518-0695
-Affiliation: Indian Institute of Science Education & Research,Bhopal

-Date:

#Summary:

The volcano plot visualizes complex datasets generated by genomic screening or proteomic approaches. It is essentially a scatter plot, in which the coordinates of data points are defined by effect size and statistical significance[1]. In gene expression analysis, a volcano plot most often refers to the scatter-plot with -log10(p-value) from the t-test as the y-axis and log2(FC) as the x-axis[2]. Here, FC stands for Fold Change; log2(FC) evaluates log ratio between two conditions (or the average of ratios when there are replicates) and considers all genes that differ by more than an arbitrary cut-off value to be differentially expressed.Genes with statistically significant differential expression according to the gene-specific t test will lie above a horizontal threshold line. Genes with large fold-change values will lie outside a pair of vertical threshold lines[3].Genes thus can be classified as biologically & statistically significant and non-significant. The former class is subdivided into genes with either upregulation( increased functionality or production of specific proteins) or downregulated ( decreased functionality or production of specific proteins) expression.



Voldeplot is a lightweight, interactive web application built using the R Shiny package. The application enables users to visualize volcano plots and study differential gene expression data with ease. Designed for accessibility, VoldePlot allows users to upload their own datasets, dynamically filter results based on Log Fold Change & p-value thresholds, and visually identify upregulated and downregulated genes. The application also offers an additional feature to highlight expression of any particular gene from the provided dataset. 

VoldePlot aims to assist researchers with minimal coding experience, offering them a user-friendly interface for data analysis and visualization.

#Statement of Need:

VoldePlot offers an intuitive web interface for biologists and researchers with limited coding experience to generate volcano plots easily. It generates a high quality plot instantly from uploaded CSV file, helping in quick data exploration and hypothesis generation. The application is built via R packages shiny and ggplot2 and hosted by shinyapp.io platform. This ensures users can use this tool without any pre-installed coding/plotting platform , but directly access through the weblink: https://voldeplot.shinyapps.io/VoldePlot/

Users can interactively adjust Log2(FC) and p-value thresholds to explore gene regulation patterns visually and analytically. Based on input threshold values , VoldePlot automatically updates each gene expression status as either UP (upregulation), DOWN( downregulation) or NO( non-significant), eliminating the need for manual filtering. Users can also select a particular gene of interest and retrieve its regulatory status immediately.
 VoldePlot , along with its source code is freely accessible and easy to extend, developers can add their own advanced features to the code and reproduce better analyses, if required. This application can be particularly useful in teaching environments, providing learners an understanding of how changes in fold change and p-value can affect gene selection. 

#Running the Application:

VoldePlot can be directly accessed through the URL https://voldeplot.shinyapps.io/VoldePlot/ or its source code is available in the github repository as VoldePlot.R file. Running the code in RStudio will require installing the following dependencies-

install.packages("shiny")
install.packages("ggplot2")

Run the application by directly clicking on the RunApp button on top right.

#Use-Case:

The Github repository includes an example dataset named vdata.csv . The dataset consists of 13421 gene observations in 3 columns- ‘gene_symbol’, ‘log2FoldChange’ & ‘pvalue’. It can be used to check functionality of the application following these below steps:

Upload vdata.csv in FileInput box.

Select the columns corresponding to:
Log2 Fold Change
P-value
Gene ID


Adjust sliders to set threshold values for significance.
View interactive volcano plot and filterable data tables according to gene of interest. 



#Acknowledgement:

This work was partially inspired by VolcanoseR webtool(https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR). Also thanks to developers of Rstudio(now Posit) and Shiny package, enabling interactive data visualization and analysis through the web.


#References:


[1]Goedhart, Joachim, and Martijn S. Luijsterburg. ‘VolcaNoseR Is a Web App for Creating, Exploring, Labeling and Sharing Volcano Plots’. Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 1, Nov. 2020, p. 20560. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-76603-3.

[2]Li, Wentian. ‘VOLCANO PLOTS IN ANALYZING DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSIONS WITH mRNA MICROARRAYS’. Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, vol. 10, no. 06, Dec. 2012, p. 1231003. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219720012310038.

[3]Cui, Xiangqin, and Gary A. Churchill. ‘Statistical Tests for Differential Expression in cDNA Microarray Experiments’. Genome Biology, vol. 4, no. 4, Apr. 2003, p. 210. Springer Link, https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2003-4-4-210.




